## Industrial Decline in Seventeenth-century Italy

The seventeenth century was not a good time for Italian industry. Production of cloth fell drastically in Venice, Florence, Milan, Naples, and other cities; papermaking and other crafts declined, banking and shipping suffered in their wake. At the time, the argument was made in document after document that heavy taxation was to blame for industry’s woes, and that only a measure of tax relief could reverse the trend by making goods more competitive. At first sight the argument seems to have a good deal of merit, for we know that in the course of the seventeenth century the burden of taxation increased in most Italian states. A closer look, however, ought to make us hesitant to accept the loud complaints of merchants and artisans and their plans for relief at face value because what few data are available on the incidence of taxation on the price of manufactured goods suggest that the taxes were rather modest. In the Genoa silk industry, for example, taxes accounted for a mere 5 percent to 6 percent of total costs; in Florence the government apparently taxed the price of woolen cloth at only 1 percent, in Milan at perhaps 2 percent.Only in the case of Venice, where taxes represented a staggering 42 percent of the price of high-quality cloth, can we say with confidence that drastically slashing taxes would have made the industry more competitive.

But, Venice excepted, there are other reasons for believing that taxes were not a decisive factor in undermining the competitiveness of Italian goods. The case of Milan is revealing on this point. There the government did from time to time grant tax reduction, and yet textile production failed to recover. Moreover, even the strongest advocates of tax relief as the panacea for industrial recovery also urged the government to impose a total ban on imported goods, thus implying that tax relief, however desirable, was no cure-all.

If not taxes, then labor costs may have been the villain. And indeed documents of the time often included complaints about the excessive costs of labor: wage rates were said to be higher than those prevailing abroad, with the result that Italian manufactures could not effectively stand up to Dutch and English goods in some markets, and the same kind of complaint was voiced about labor costs in the shipbuilding and shipping industries. Seventeenth-century documents make it virtually impossible for us to measure and compare labor costs in different countries at the time, but the very fact that Italian goods and freight services were being undersold by foreign products, and that labor costs were frequently singled out at the time as being responsible for the loss of market shares, strongly suggests that high wages were a chief weakness of the Italian economy.

As for what kept labor costs high, seventeenth-century sources often point a finger at the powerful and firmly entrenched craft guilds (associations of artisans), alleging that they kept wages up either directly by setting and enforcing rigid wage rates, or indirectly by controlling (and, in fact, restricting) access to crafts by means of long-apprenticeship requirements and stiff admission fees, with little regard for the long-term consequences of their actions. In some instances those charges may well have been justified, but a sweeping indictment of the guilds does not seem warranted. Much of the evidence we have of labor relations points in the direction of labor markets in which artisans had little control over the level of pay.

Rather, the explanation for persistently high labor costs must be sought in long-term conditions of the labor market that sustained relatively high levels of pay in the towns, even in the face of declining employment in a number of major industries. Most probably, the key factor at play here was the total demand for labor remaining fairly stable over the course of the century, as the urban economies continued to offer a broad range of employment opportunities in select luxury or artistic crafts, retail trade, and domestic service. That this was indeed the case is strongly suggested by the fact that neither Genoa, Milan, Venice, nor Florence were turned into ghost towns when their celebrated manufactures went under. Actually their population remained fairly stable over the course of the century.

## Attempts at Determining Earth’s Age

Since the dawn of civilization, people have been curious about the age of Earth. In addition, we have not been satisfied in being able to sate merely the relative geologic age of a rock or fossil. Human curiosity demands that we know actual age in years.

Geologists working during the nineteenth century understood rock bodies, they would have to concentrate on natural processes that continue at a constant rate and that also leave some sort of tangible record in the rocks. Evolution is one such process, and geologist Charles Lyell (1797-1875) recognized this. BY comparing the amount of evolution exhibited by marine mollusks then, Lyell estimated that 80 million years had elapsed since the beginning of the Tertiary Period. He came astonishingly close to the mark, since it was actually about 65 million years.However, for older sequence of evolutionary development, estimates based on parts in the fossil record. Rates of evolution for many orders of plants and animals were not well understood.

In another attempt, geologists reasoned that if rates of deposition could be determined for sedimentary rocks, they might be able to estimate the time required for deposition of a given thickness of strata, or rock layers. Similar reasoning suggested that one could estimate total elapsed geologic time by dividing the average thickness of sediment transported annually to the oceans into the total thickness of sedimentary rock that had ever been deposited in the past. Unfortunately, such estimates did not adequately account for past difference in rates of sedimentation or losses to the total section of strata during episodes of erosion. Also, some very ancient sediments were no longer recognizable, having been converted to igneous and metamorphic rocks in the course of mountain building. Estimates of Earth’s total age based on sedimentation rates ranged from as little as million to over a billion year.

Yet another scheme for approximating Earth’s age had been proposed in 1715 by Sir Edmund Halley (1656-1742), whose name we associate with the famous comet. Halley surmised that the ocean formed soon after the origin of the planet and therefore would be only slightly younger that the age of the solid Earth. He reasoned that the original ocean was not salty and that subsequently salt derived from the weathering of rocks was brought to the sea by streams. Thus, if one knew the total amount of salt dissolved in the ocean and the amount added each year, it might be possible to calculate the ocean’s age in 1899, Irish geologist John Joly (1857-1933) attempted the calculation. From information provide by gauges placed at the mouths of streams. Joly was able to estimate the annual increment of salt to the oceans. Then, knowing the salinity of ocean water and the approximate volume of water, he calculated the amount of salt already held in solution in the oceans. An estimate of the age of the ocean was obtained by diving the total salt in the ocean by the rate of salt added each year. Beginning with essentially non-saline oceans, it would have taken about 90 million years of the oceans to reach their present salinity, according to Joly. The figure, however, was off the currently accepted mark of 4.54 billion by a factor of 50, largely because there was no way to account accurately by recycled salt and salt incorporated into clay mineral deposited on the sea floors. Even though in error, Joly’s calculations clearly supported those geologists who insisted on an age for Earth far in excess of a few million years. The belief in Earth’s immense antiquity was also supported by Darwin, Huxley, and other evolutionary biologists, who saw the need for time in the hundreds of millions of years to accomplish the organic evolution apparent in the fossil record.