## What Controls Flowering

The timing of flowering and seed production is precisely tuned to a plant's physiology and the rigors of its environment. In temperate climate plants lost flower early enough so that their seeds can mature before the deadly winds of autumn. Depending on how quickly the seed and food develop flowering may occur in spring as it does in oaks; in summer as in lettuces; or even in autumn as in asters.

What environmental cues do plants use to determine the seasons? Most cues such as temperature or water availability are quite variable: autumn can be warm; a late snow could fall in spring; also summer might be unusually cool and wet. So the only reliable cue is day length: longer days always mean that spring and summer are coming; shorter days foretell the onset of autumn and winter.

With respect to flowering botanists classify plants as day neutral, long day or short day. A day neutral plant flowers as soon as it has sufficiently grown and developed regardless of the length of day. The neutral plants include tomatoes, corn, snapdragons and roses. Although the naming is traditional, long day and short day plants are better described as short night and long night plants because their flowering actually depends on the duration of continuous darkness rather than on day length. Short night plants (which include lettuces, spinach, iris, clover and petunias) flower when the length of darkness is shorter than a species' specific critical period. Long night plants (including asters, potatoes, soy beans, goldenrod and cockleburs) flower when the length of uninterrupted darkness is longer than the species' specific critical period. Thus spinach is classified as a short night plant because it flowers only if the night is shorter than eleven hours (its critical period), and the cocklebur is a long night plant because it flowers only if an uninterrupted darkness lasts more than 8.5 hours. Both of these plants will flower with ten-hour nights.

Plant scientists can induce flowering in the cocklebur by exposing leaves to long nights (longer than its 8.5 hour critical period) in a special chamber, while the rest of the plant continues to experience short nights. Clearly, a signal that induces flowering transmitted from the leave to the flowering bud. Plant physiologists have been attempting for decades to isolate these elusive signaling molecule often called florigen (literally, flowering maker). Some researchers believe they are close to demonstrating a flower's stimulating substance for specific type of plant. Using genetic manipulation, it is likely, however, that interactions among multiple and yet unidentified plant hormones stimulate or inhibit flowering, and that these chemicals may differ among plant species. Researchers have had more success in determining how plants measure the length of uninterrupted darkness, which is a crucial stimulus for producing whatever substance control flowering.

To measure continuous darkness, a plant needs two things: some sort of metabolic clock to measure time (the duration of darkness) and a light detecting system to set the clock. Virtually all organisms have an internal biological clock that measures the time even without environmental cues. In most organisms including plants, the biological clock is poorly understood, but we know that the environmental cues, particularly light, can reset the clock. How do plants detect light? The light detecting system of plants is a pigment in leaves called phytochrome (literally, plant color).

Plants seem to use the phytochrome system in combination with their internal biological clocks to detect the duration of continuous darkness. Cockleburs, for example, flower under the schedule of sixteen hours of darkness and eight hours of light. However, interrupting the middle of the dark period with just a minute or two of lights prevents flowering Thus their flowering is controlled by the length of continuous darkness.It is evident that even brief exposure to sunlight or white light will reset their biological clocks.The color of the light used for the light exposure is also important. A nighttime flash of pure red light inhibits flowering, while flash of light at the far-red end of the spectrum has no effect on flowering, as if no light were detected

## The United States Interstate Highway System

The United States Interstate System was initiated in 1956 under a law that outlined a system of more than 40,000 miles of roads from coast to coast and border to border, to link major cities and most state capitals. These highways, over 95 percent complete by 1990, had some important advantages over traditional long-distance routes. Speed was the most obvious one, with a coast-to-coast auto trip that had taken 50 or more days in 1900 down to four or fewer by 1990, Equally important in urban areas, these roads could carry a high volume of traffic, even during congested, peak commuting hours. Safety was a third critical advantage. Since cross traffic was eliminated and opposite direction traffic separated, there were fewer opportunities for collision.

There were limitations to the Interstate Highway system. While speed was increased, route choice was decreased, since there were so few roads planned. Often it became more time-efficient for drivers to drive out of their way on Interstate than take a shorter but less speedy local route. This, of course, increased fuel consumption and its ensuing pollution. Interstates also limited access to desired locations, such as businesses or even entire communities, due to location of entrances and exits to the highway. High-speed travel also brought a new, blurred image of the landscape through which drivers passed.

Perhaps the most serious change caused by the Interstate Highway system was the new order which it brought to the built landscape. Residential patterns were altered as suburbs extended farther into areas outside cities. Commuting distance of 60 or more miles (97 or more kilometers) became possible, if not acceptable, to everyone. This, coupled with other government-sponsored programs, hastened population movement from the cities to the suburbs after 1945. Businesses were equally affected, particularly neighborhood shopping areas and small-town downtowns. Commercial areas reoriented to points of traffic concentration – Interstate interchanges and routes leading to them. Just as nineteenth-century downtowns had clustered near railroad depots, the new dispersed commercial zones concentrated at Interstate interchanges. Interstate Highways also allowed certain businesses, such as light industry, greater freedom of locational choice and many former inner city enterprises relocated to suburbs or small towns as a result.

This new urban order had a negative effect on older, poorer areas, for two reasons. First, many planners viewed highway development as a federally funded method to renew run-down areas under the guise of “progress.” Thus, older neighborhoods were often the first targeted for destruction so the land could be used for new highways.Secondly, these roads were planned based on allegedly objective criteria of traffic capacity, cost, and scientific safety standards by federal and state level engineers. Plans did not account for local goals other than those associated with prime travel destinations, nor was there serious examination of the social consequences of highway rights of way. This lack of comprehensive planning allowed serious and permanent damage to occur, including destruction of viable urban neighborhoods, destruction of much of the historical fabric of small towns and cities alike, permanent occupation of waterfronts by highways, and unnatural segmentation of cities into zones unrelated to function.More positively, Interstate assured cities access to those skilled workers who preferred suburban living, fostered some local planning movements, provided permanent buffers to those neighborhoods that remained intact, and increased weekend recreation travel. As in cities, the Interstate Highways brought both good and ill to rural areas. The highways meant better access to urban amenities, as well as better roads for crop and livestock transport. But their construction also removed millions of acres from production and also divided farms into uneconomic or unreachable parcels.

While Interstate Highways and their related intra-urban alternate routes have often been criticized for destroying public transportation, in many instances public and private transit were integrated within a single transportation network. In Chicago, for example, the city’s existing subway system was extended along with construction of superhighways into the suburbs. A center portion of the highway right-of-way was reserved for electric railway lines and stations. At suburban terminals large parking areas assured that passengers could access the system, thereby guaranteeing ridership for the railway lines.