## The Origin of Coral Reefs

Coral reefs are natural structures formed from deposits of the calcium carbonate secretions of coral, a marine animal that lives in colonies. In general, coral reefs are grouped into one of three categories, atolls, barrier reefs, and fringing reefs. Atolls are usually easily distinguished because they are modified horseshoe-shaped reefs that rise out of very deep water far from land and enclose a lagoon (a body of certain water surrounded by a coral reef). With few exceptions, atolls are found only in the Indo-Pacific area. Barrier reefs and fringing reefs, on the other hand, tend to grade into each other and are not readily separable. Some scientists would prefer to group them into a single category. Both types occur adjacent to a landmass, with a barrier reef being separated from the landmass by a greater distance and deeper water channel than the fringing reef. Fringing reefs and barrier reefs are common throughout the coral reef zones in all oceans.

Different types of reefs and reefs in different oceans may have diverse origins and histories. The greatest interest in the origin of reefs has centered on atolls. For many years, humans speculated as to how such reefs could develop in such deep water, miles from the nearest emergent land. This interest was heightened when it was discovered that reef corals cold not live deeper than 50-70 meters. This led to the development of several theories concerning the origin of atolls. Only one need be discussed here – the subsidence or compensation theory. This explanation for the origin of atolls was first advanced by Charles Darwin following his five-year voyage on the Beagle, during which time he had the opportunity to study reefs in several areas. According to Darwin’s subsidence theory, atolls are created when fringing reefs begin to grow on the shores of newly formed volcanic islands that have pushed to the surface from deep water. These islands often begin to subside, and if the subsidence is not too fast, reef growth will keep up with the subsidence. The reef growth will then form a barrier reef and, ultimately, an atoll as the island disappears beneath the sea. When the island has disappeared, corals continue to grow on the outside and keep the reef at the surface. On the inside, where the island used to be, quiet water conditions and high sedimentation prevail. These conditions prevent continued vigorous coral growth, hence, a lagoon develops. This theory links all three reef types into evolutionary sequence, but is not an explanation for all fringing and barrier reef types.

Since the current surface features of atolls give no evidence of a volcanic base, in the years after the development of Darwin’s theory other explanations were offered, and the whole concept of the origin of atolls became embroiled in the controversy over the origin of coral reefs. If Darwin’s theory was correct, it must be assumed that drilling down through the current atoll reefs would yield layer after layer of reef limestone until, finally, volcanic rock would be encountered. The ability to drill to the base of atoll reefs and resolved the problem had to wait until the mid-twentieth century in 1953. Ladd and other geologists reported borings at Eriwetok atoll in the Marshall Islands that penetrated 1,283meters of reef limestone and then hit volcanic rock. This was the evidence that Darwin’s theory was substantially correct.The correctness of this theory has been strengthened by the discovery of flat-topped mountains or guyots that, at present, have their tops many hundreds or thousands of meters below the ocean surface, but have on their surface the remains of shallow water corals. Evidently, these mountains sank too fast for reef growth to keep above the ocean surface.

Although the subsidence theory links all three reef types in a successional sequence, not all barrier reefs and fringing reefs can be explained by this mechanism. Indeed, the reasons barrier and fringing reef types occur around continental margins and high non-volcanic islands are simply that these areas offer suitable environmental conditions for the growth of reefs and a suitable substrate (surface) on which to begin growth. The extensive reefs around the Indonesian Islands, the Philippines, New Guinea, Fiji and most of the Caribbean Islands are there because a suitable substrate in shallow water existed on which they could initiate growth. In none of these areas are large land areas subsiding, not will these reefs ultimately become atolls.

## Agriculture in Medieval Japan

A rapid population of Japan occurred during its medieval times. Japan’s population was around 7 million but it rose keenly to 12 million from year 1200 to 1600. In this period, numerous hamlets formed throughout the country. They were mostly formed in the lands listed as “unsettled” or as a “wasteland” before 1300. There were many facets in increase in number of new hamlets，but by far the most significant characteristic of newly formed hamlets were that they were much bigger in terms of size compared to that of the hamlets built before 1300. There are many factors for forming of such large towns that contributed to increase in population mass. Some factors that can be considered are people’s demand for local authority, voluntarily, to defend themselves against outside threats or to form religious communities. Whatever the impetus, such formation of large villages was due to improvements in the agricultural technologies. Some improvements in technologies involved turning over of fields, irrigation methods, and usage of waterwheels, iron tools and diversification of crop output.

Among many improvements in agriculture, field leveling was the most basic practice used to optimize the land for farming. The farmers would create flat land for farming by leveling a field. They then would use the surfeit soil from the field to level the slightly slanted field. As a result, two fields of difference in altitude would be formed. Such difference in elevation allowed farmers to use the lower for rice paddy and the higher for dry crops. Practice of field leveling allowed a paddy culture to settle and allowed vast variety in dry crops to be produced due to the formation of drop crop field. Though the labor involved in formation of fields was enormous, the field preparation enabled marshlands alongside the rivers to be used for husbandry even if the rivers were uncontrolled.

Rice crops require ample water for growth and it takes much time until they are ready to be harvested. So farmers naturally worked by places where they had access to ample supply of water, such as riverbanks, streams and ponds. However, natural water supply was inefficient for the growth of rice, especially in sweltering summers. This led to the usage and development of ditches and dikes. Development in drawing the water from the distant locations led number of dams to increase and directed them to wherever they needed them. This was most evident in Yamato Basin where famers built permanent dams. The water detained in the pools was kept for times when they needed water for farming in droughty seasons. Such development led to keen proliferation of crop output as the heated water metabolized the germination of crops and caused crops to mature even faster.

By mid 1500s, one quarter of all paddy land were used to double crop. The farmers not only used fields to grow two crops in a year, but they even grew three in a single annual cycle. An envoy from Korea stated that Japanese farmers from Hyogo region would grow barley and sow in winter and harvest them in summer. Followed by rice cropping in summer and fall, buckwheat was harvested in winter. As time went on agriculture advanced, such technique progressed from generation to generation. Farming became more consistent and the crop output became even greater. A greater sense of discipline in land tilling and wide range of crops being planted in the same piece of land broadened the understanding of agriculture in farmers.

Crops harvested were used for farmers themselves. In many cases, one hectare of decent land was enough to sustain their entire family. They would only plow enough land for food to cater families for several reasons. Much of the medieval Japanese reclamation of land was due to the search for enough arable land to meet the food needed for just a single household. In case a farmer having enough fields for crop output required for his family, he would expand his fields no that one had to put into farming for his crops to grow. This was further compounded by the scarcity of land for fanning as well as limiting capacity for water and fertilizer supplies, not to mention the likelihood of antagonizing neighbors. Taking these variable factors into consideration, farmers of this period persisted with single hectare or less of arable land, just enough to sustain their families.