## Constraints on Natural Selection

Natural selection is the process in which organisms with certain traits survive and reproduce while organisms that are less able to adapt to their environment die off. As Darwin pointed out, natural selection does not necessarily produce evolutionary progress, much less perfection. The limits to the effectiveness of natural selection are most clearly revealed by the universality of extinction. More than 99.9 percent of all evolutionary lines that once existed on Earth have become extinct. Mass extinctions remind us forcefully that evolution is not a steady approach to an ever-higher perfection but an unpredictable process in which the best-adapted organisms may be suddenly exterminated y a catastrophe and their place taken by lineages that prior to the catastrophe seemed to be without distinction or prospects.

There are numerous constraints, or limits, on the power of natural selection to bring about change. First, the genetic variation needed to perfect a characteristic may not be forthcoming. Second, during evolution, the adoption of one among several possible solutions to a new environmental opportunity may greatly restrict the possibilities for subsequent evolution. For instance, when a selective advantage for a skeleton developed among the ancestors of the vertebrates and the arthropods, the ancestors of the arthropods had the prerequisites for developing an external skeleton, and those of the vertebrates had the prerequisites for acquiring an internal skeleton. The entire subsequent history of these two large groups of organisms was affected by the two different paths taken by their remote ancestors. The vertebrates were able to develop such huge creatures as dinosaurs, elephants, and whales. A large crab is the largest type that the arthropods were able to achieve.

Another constraint on natural selection is developmental interaction. The different components of an individual organism—its structures and organs—are not independent of one another, and none of them responds to selection without interacting with the others. The whole developmental machinery is a single interacting system. Organisms are compromises among competing demands. How far a particular structure or organ can respond to the forces of selection depends, to a considerable extent, on the resistance offered by other structures and organs, as well as components of the genotype (the totality of an individual’s genes).

The structure of the genotype itself imposes limits on the power of natural selection. The classical metaphor of the genotype was that of a beaded string on which the genes were lined up like pearls in a necklace.According to this view, each gene was more or less independent of the others. Not much is left of this previously accepted image.It is now known that there are different functional classes of genes, some charged to produce material, others to regulate it, and still others that are apparently not functioning at all. There are single coding genes, moderately repetitive DNA, highly repetitive DNA, and many other kinds of DNA. Discovering exactly how they all interact with one another is still a rather poorly understood area of genetics.

A further constraint on natural selection is the capacity for nongenetic modification. The more plastic the organism’s body characteristics are (owing to developmental flexibility), the more this reduces the force of adverse selection pressures. Plants, and particularly microorganisms, have a far greater capacity for individual modification than do animals. Natural selection is involved even in this phenomenon, since the capacity for nongenetic adaptation is under strict genetic control. When a population shifts to a new specialized environment, genes will be selected during the following generations that reinforce and may eventually largely replace the capacity for nongenetic adaptation.

Finally, which organisms survive and reproduce in a population is partly the result of chance, and this also limits the power of natural selection. Chance operates at every level of the process of reproduction, from the transmission of parental chromosomes to the survival of the newly formed individual. Furthermore, potentially favorable gene combinations are often destroyed by indiscriminate environmental forces such as storms, floods, earthquakes, or volcanic eruptions, without natural selection being given the opportunity to favor these genotypes. Yet over time, in the survival of those few individuals that become the ancestors of subsequent generations, relative fitness always plays a major role.

## Stone Tools and Pottery Fragments

Aside from ancient buildings, in sheer bulk the largest part of the archaeological record is made up of stone tools and pottery fragments (shards). Stone tools are the earliest known artifacts, having been first used more than two million years ago, and they have remained in use to the present day. When a chunk of fine-grain stone is struck with sufficient force at the proper angle with another rock or with a wood or bone baton, a shock wave will pass through the stone and detach a flake of the desired size and shape. In analyzing ancient stone tools, many archaeologists have mastered the skills needed to make stone tools themselves. Few things are sharper than a fragment struck from fine-grain flint or from obsidian (volcanic glass). Obsidian is so fine grained that flakes of it can have edges only about twenty molecules thick-hundreds of times thinner than steel tools

Through experimentation, some archaeologists are able to produce copies of almost every stone tool type used in antiquity. A common research strategy is to make flint tools, use them to cut up meat, saw wood, clean hides, bore holes, etc, and then compare the resulting wear traces with the marks found on ancient artifacts. Sometimes electron-scanning microscopes are used to study minute variations in these use marks. Some rough correspondence can be found between the types of uses and the characteristics of wear marks, but there are many ambiguities

Ethriographic data from people who still use these tools, like one study of how the IKung hunter-gatherers use different styles of stone spear points to identity their different social groupings, indicate that even crude-looking stone tools may reflect a great deal of the social and economic structure

Ceramics were in use much later than the first stone tools (appearing in quantity in many places about 10,000 years ago), but they were used in such massive quantities in antiquity that, for many archaeologists, work life consists mainly of the slow sorting and analyzing of pottery fragments. Ceramic pots were first made by hand and dried in the sun or in low temperature kilns, a process that did not produce a very durable material. But in many areas of Africa, Asia and Europe high-temperature kilns produced pottery that is nearly a form of glass, and fragments of these pots survive even when the pottery is broken

Ceramics form such a large part of archaeologists’ lives because ceramics express so much about the people who made them. Pots are direct indicators of function in that they show how diets and economies changed over time. Archaeologists have documented how pottery in the American Southwest changed in prehistoric times as a diet developed that included boiled seeds of various native plants, and pottery was developed to withstand the heat and mechanical stresses of the boiling process

Ceramics are almost always analyzed on the basis of their style. This idea of style is hard to define, but changing styles are the basis on which archaeologists date much of the archaeological record. But for many archaeologists, ceramic styles are more than just convenient devices of dating. For many archaeologists, stylistic decoration of artifacts is the primary means by which one can enter the cognitive world of the ancients. Societies throughout history have invested their objects with styles that have profound and complex meanings and effects. In the case of the Maya and every other early civilization, rulers used particular symbols and styles as mechanisms through which they portrayed, communicated, and implemented their power. In all societies, styles fix social meaning and are powerful ways in which social groups define and construct their culture.Styles of objects, language, and personal behavior identity people in terms of gender, age group, ethnic group, socioeconomic class, and in many other important ways. Some researchers, for example, have argued that a particular kind of pottery, called Ramey incised (which is incised with figures of eyes, fish, arrows, and abstract objects and was used by the people in the area of present-day Missouri and Illinois at about A.D 900), was primarily used to distribute food but was also used to communicate the idea that the society’s elite, for whom the pots were made, were mediators of cosmic forces