## Isolation and diversification in the Tropical

The dense vegetation of the tropical rain forest preventing living organisms from moving easily. This in the way the rain forest limits human movement. For example, each valley in New Guinea, an large tropical rain forests, has its own tribe— each with language manner of dress, and child-rearing tendency. This diversification is so great that New Guineans have developed about 1000 different languages in contrast to the fifty that occur throughout all of Europe. Often people born in these isolated tribes never venture further than 10 miles from their birthplace.

It is not unreasonable to surmise that the same cause of the great diversity of tribes and languages in the rainforests of New Guinea—the extreme hindrance to movement caused by ecological congestion—may also have contributed to the great diversity in plants and animals in rainforests worldwide. In open continental regions, over grasslands or dry stretches, birds or insects may travel many miles before they come upon a new likely residence. But beneath the rainforest canopy, dispersal potential becomes drastically severed, and no bird, animal or insect could move very far before encountering a wealth of edible opportunities and available habitats. Jungle populations that become separated from each other by just hundreds or even tens of miles may be as effectively and permanently isolated from each other as if they were on opposite sides of the globe.Indeed, this is one of the evolutionary reasons for the very bright colors and loud calls of many rain forest plants and animals. Consider the vocalizations and vibrancy of parrots and toucans (tropical birds with typically brightly covered feathers) or consider the howler monkey, the world’s loudest land animal. These noisy or highly visible shows help the animals discover the whereabouts of other members of the same species within the lavish display of green.

Thus for many jungle organisms, new species can begin to occur at very short distances, and like a wildfire, this great diversity led to spread and fuel itself, for the different plants and animals would provide great variations in the survival benefits and drawbacks within all the small neighboring micro-territories. These extreme isolating effects of course would only occur below or at the level of the canopy, which is that upper, oceanic layer of leaves situated some 45—50 meters above the ground that forms the unbroken living roof of the rain forest.

But there is another less crowed layer, the emergent layer. The emergent layer made up of the occasional enormous tree that grows 60-70 meters high, like the giant kapok, or silk cotton, tree, which often breaks through the darkness of the canopy and extends upward into the open sunshine. In South America, these more sparsely situated leafy treetops have become the nesting sites of the harpy eagle, the largest eagle in the world, with a wing span reaching 2 meters. The harpy eagle uses its advantageous position and view to prey upon the monkeys resulting through the meadow of canopy leaves below—a hunting system that is similar to that of North American birds of prey that sit in tress looking down for animals moving about the fields and grasslands. In the rain forest, thought this system begins at 50 meters off the ground.

Unlike the more than 40 species of toucans that inhabit the Amazon rainforest, the range of the harpy eagle extends from Central America and all across the South American jungles, yet it has not diversified. Clearly, the freedom of movement offered above the canopy has allowed a continuous flow of genes and has not encouraged diversification of the species. The giant kapok trees, in which these eagles so often build their nests are similarity unconfined by their neighboring trees and have retained their powers of dispersal. Their seeds, surrounded by fluffy cotton fibers.

## Climate Change and the Natufian People

The so-called Natufian culture inhabited what is now the Middle East between approximately 14,000 and 11,500 years ago. This period is commonly split into two subperiods, Early Natufian (14,000 to 13,000 years ago) and Late Natufian (13,000 to 11,500). The Natufians were hunter-gatherers who relied primarily on gazelle, although they also cultivated some cereal grains. During the early period at least, they lived year-round in villages in built stone houses. Like all human beings, their way of life depended on the climate. Around 13,000 years ago, their climate began to change, becoming colder and drier, a period known as the Younger Dryas.

We know that times were hard in the increasingly arid landscapes of the Younger Dryas, but quite how hard remains unclear. The droughts certainly caused many ponds and rivers to disappear completely and the larger lakes to shrink in size. The people who lived in the south, in today’s deserts of the Negev and the Sinai, were most likely hit the hardest. They returned to a completely transient hunter-gatherer way of life, moving from place to place. Survival required improved hunting weapons: game (animals hunted for food) had become scarce, and consequently, success had become essential when a kill was possible. And so we see the invention of the Harif point, a new kind of arrowhead.

Further north, the impact of the Younger Dryas may have been less severe. Yet survival still required more than just a return to the ancient mobile hunter-gatherer lifestyle, especially as there were now many more people needing food than had been the case during earlier periods, when the Natufians lived in permanent dwellings. One response was to hunt a much wider range of animals than before, and hence we find in Late Natufian settlements the bones of many small-game species as well as larger, ever-present gazelle.

Another response to the changing climate was to continue, and perhaps expand the cultivation of plants. Wild cereals were particularly hard hit by the Younger Dryas owing to a decrease in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere. This diminution, carefully documented from air bubbles trapped in Antarctic ice, inhibited their photosynthesis and markedly reduced their yields. Consequently, whatever cultivation practices had begun during the Early Natufian period—weeding, transplanting, watering, pest control—may now have become essential to secure sufficient food. And these may have created the first domesticated strains.

This appears to be what happened at the village of Abu Hureyra just before its abandonment. When the archaeologist Gordon Hillman studied the cereal grains from the site, he found a few grains of rye from plants that had undergone the transition into domestic forms. When dated, they were shown to lie between 11,000 and 10,500 B.C.—the oldest domesticated cereal grain from anywhere in the world. Along with these grains, Hillman found seeds from the weeds that typically grow in cultivated soil. And so it appears that, as the availability of wild plant foods declined due to the onset of the Younger Dryas, the Abu Hureyra people invested an ever greater amount of time and effort in caring for the wild rye and by doing so unintentionally transformed it into a domestic crop. But even this could not support the village—it was abandoned as people were forced to return to a mobile lifestyle, perhaps carrying pouches of cereal grain. The domesticated rye of Abu Hureyra reverted to its wild state.

The geographical range of the Late Natufians also changed. With their increased interest in plant cultivation, the Late Natufians drifted away from the depleted woodlands where their forebears once flourished. They were drawn to the alluvial soils (soils deposited by rivers) of the valleys, not only those of the River Jordan, but also those found by the great rivers of the Mesopotamian plain and in the vicinity of lakes and rivers throughout the Middle East. Large expanses of these rich, fertile soils became available as the rivers and lakes struck during the Younger Dryas. Wild, but cultivated, cereals grew well in such soil, especially when close to the meager springs, ponds, and streams that survived the arid conditions.