## Vocalization in Frogs

The tungara frog is a small terrestrial vertebrate that is found in Central America. Tungara frogs breed in small pools, and breeding groups range from a single male to choruses of several hundred males. The advertisement call of a male tungara frog is a strange noise, a whine that starts at a frequency of 900 hertz and sweeps downward to 400 hertz in about 400 milliseconds. The whine may be produced by itself, or it may be followed by one or several chucks or clucking sounds. When a male tungara frog is calling alone in a pond, it usually gives only the whine portion of the call, but as additional males join a chorus, more and more of the frogs produce calls that include chucks. Scientists noted that male tungara frogs calling in a breeding pond added chucks to their calls when they heard the recorded calls of other males played back. That observation suggested that it was the presence of other calling males that incited frogs to make their calls more complex by adding chucks to the end of the whine.

What advantage would a male frog in a chorus gain from using a whine-chuck call instead of a whine Perhaps the complex call is more attractive to female frogs than the simple call. Michael Ryan and Stanley Rand tested that hypothesis by placing female tungara frogs in a test arena with a speaker at each side. One speaker broadcast a pre-recorded whine call, and the second speaker broadcast a whine-chuck. When female frogs were released individually in the center of the arena, fourteen of the fifteen frogs tested moved toward the speaker broadcasting the whine-chuck call.

If female frogs are attracted to whine-chuck calls in preference to whine calls, why do male frogs give whine-chuck calls only when other males are present Why not always give the most attractive call possible One possibility is that whine-chuck calls require more energy than whines, and males save energy by only using whine-chucks when competition with other males makes the energy expenditure necessary. However, measurements of the energy expenditure of calling male tungara frogs showed that energy cost was not related to the number of chucks. Another possibility is that male frogs giving whine-chuck calls are more vulnerable to predators than frogs giving only whine calls tungara frogs in breeding choruses are preyed upon by a species of frog-eating bats, Trachops cirrhosus, and it was demonstrated that the bats locate the frogs by homing on their vocalizations.

In a series of playback experiments, Michael Ryan and Merlin Tuttle placed pairs of speakers in the forest and broadcast vocalizations of tungara frogs. One speaker played a recording of a whine and the other a recording of a whine-chuck. The bats responded as if the speakers were frogs: they flew toward the speakers and even landed on them. In five experiments at different sites, the bats approached speakers broadcasting whine-chuck calls twice as frequently as those playing simple whines (168 approaches versus 81). Thus, female frogs are not alone in finding whine-chuck calls more attractive than simple whinesan important predator of frogs also responds more strongly to the complex calls.

Ryan and his colleagues measured the rates of predation in tungara frog choruses of different sizes. Large choruses of frogs did not attract more bats than small choruses, and consequently the risk of predation for an individual frog was less in a large chorus than in a small one. Predation was an astonishing 19 percent of the frogs per night in the smallest chorus and a substantial 1.5 percent per night even in the largest chorus. When a male frog shifts from a simple whine to a whine-chuck call, it increases its chances of attracting a female, but it simultaneously increases its risk of attracting a predator.In small choruses, the competition from other males for females is relatively small, and the risk of predation is relatively large.Under these conditions it is apparently advantageous for a male tungara frog to give simple whines.However, as chorus size increases, competition with other males also increases while the risk of predation falls. In that situation, the advantage of giving a complex call apparently outweighs the risks.

## Mesopotamian and Egyptian Settlements

Two of the world’s most ancient civilizations, Egypt and Mesopotamia in present-day Iraq, can be contrasted as opposite poles on a continuum of settlement types, with Mesopotamia representing larger city-states and Egypt characterized by village-states. Mesopotamian city-state systems were made up of densely populated urban areas. The different city-state systems shared common status symbols, language, and economic systems; but their respective elites tended to compete with each other, often militarily, to control territory, trade routes, and other resources. Each city-state controlled a relatively small territory, often only a few hundred square kilometers, and had its own capital city, which in many cases was enclosed by a wall. In addition to its capital, a city-state might govern a number of smaller centers as well as numerous farming villages and hamlets. Ancient Sumer is a classic example of such a system.

In ancient Mesopotamia, urban centers tended to be relatively large, with populations ranging from fewer than 1,000 to more than 100,000 inhabitants, depending on the ability of a particular city-state to control and appropriate food or other resources from neighboring city-states. Often, a considerable number of farmers and others lived in these centers to secure greater protection for themselves and their possessions. It is estimated that between 2900 and 2350 B.C. in southern Mesopotamia more than 80 percent of the total population lived in cities.

These cities also supported craft production, which sought to satisfy the demands of the urban elite and of society as a whole. The development of craft specialization promoted commercial exchanges between town and countryside as well as between neighboring urban centers and encouraged the growth of public markets. Although the evidence for actual marketplaces is less than clear for southern Mesopotamia, the remnants of shop-lined streets indicate vigorous commercial activity involving large numbers of people. This activity in turn promoted competition among city-states to obtain supplies of exotic raw materials. As a result of widespread access to goods produced by full-time specialists and the development of more intensive agriculture close to urban centers, Mesopotamian city-states were able to support numerous non-food producers, possibly as high as a proportion as 20 percent of the total population.

In contrast to Mesopotamia, ancient Egypt’s population has been traditionally perceived as more evenly dispersed across the landscape, a characteristic of village-states. Unlike Mesopotamia, Egypt had relatively secure and defined borders, allowing a single state to dominate the area from the first cataract of the Nile River (in Southern Egypt) to the Mediterranean. Additionally, the villages and towns of Egypt, all of which were situated near the Nile on the river’s narrow flood plain, had approximately equal access to the river and did not have to compete among themselves for water as their contemporaries in Mesopotamia were forced to do. As the main highway through Egypt, the Nile offered innumerable harbors for shipping and trading. As a result, there was no strong locational advantage to be gained in one area as opposed to another, hence the Egyptian population generally remained dispersed throughout the Valley and the Delta in low densities. Trade specialists were apparently evenly spread throughout Egypt, supported by both independent workshops in small towns and royal patronage in the regional capitals. In contrast to the defensive walls of Mesopotamian city-states, the walls of Egyptian towns (other than Memphis, which was ringed by defensive walls) primarily defined and delineated sections of the town (for example, a temple precinct from a residential area).

Egypt, however, was not without urban centers. At points where goods entered the Nile Valley via maritime routes (for example, Buto and Mendes) or via overland routes from the Red Sea, the right circumstances existed for greater urbanism. Egyptian cities and towns shared certain characteristics with other contemporary societies but also displayed unique traits influenced by the culture and environment of the Nile Valley. Thus, the geopolitical system that evolved in ancient Egypt was different from that of Mesopotamia. Egypt developed a village-state or territorial state characterized by dispersed settlements of various sizes, a form of urbanism that gave Egypt its distinctive identity.