## Three Theories about Origin of Life

Oxygen and nitrogen are major components of our current atmosphere. But the kinds of hydrogen reactions with other gases that are required to transform simple organic molecules into complex ones are interrupted by oxygen, which combines with hydrogen atoms from other compounds. Therefore, life on Earth must have originated when there was very little oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere. The modern scientific theory of life’s origin was first formulated in the 1920s by Russian scientist Aleksandr Oparin and independentiy by British scientist J. B. S. Haldane. The assumption that life sprang up from chemical reactions that were initiated in the early atmosphere (oxygen-poor/hydrogen-rich) and came to completion in the early oceans was posited by the Oparin-Haldane hypothesis, as it came to be called. Oparin and Haldane suggested that the hydrogen-containing gases caused to react with each other to form organic compounds by energy sources such as sunlight and lightning.

With regard to the view that these complex organic compounds could have begun to shape in Earth’s oceans, some researchers remain skeptical. The probability that the fundamental building blocks of life, formaldehyde (H2CO) and hydrogen cyanide(HCN), even though they were probably available, would have been concentrated sufficiently to allow further reactions to occur was likely small. And the more complex organic compounds that might have formed in this way would not have lasted long in the surface-ocean environment, because photochemical and thermal reactions would have destroyed them. Therefore, researchers have sought alternative explanations for how complex organic compounds formed.

There is one possibility that the relevant organic compounds were created in space, and asteroids or comets brought them to Earth, probably as tiny dust particles. Recovered from the stratosphere (an upper region of Earth’s atmosphere), interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) is tiny particles that are known to be extraterrestrial origin. From various researches, we know that organic compounds, including amino acids, exist in IDPs as well as in some meteorite. Now, we actually have identified the fact that amino acids and many other complex organic compounds in interstellar dust clouds. It is believed that they form from reactions between charged particles and neutral molecules. Those atoms appear in interstellar dust clouds at very low temperatures-on the order of 200 or more degrees below zero on the Celsius scale. It may seem surprising that organic chemistry could occur in the interstellar environment, but it is precisely the extremely low temperatures involved that allow complex organic molecules to exist because temperatures are too cold to allow them to decompose.

It is thought that some of the molecules created in the interstellar environment have survived the collapse of the gas and dust cloud that formed our solar nebula and Sun.They would have been incorporated into solid materials that condensed out of the nebula and formed asteroids and comets. Such materials might have been delivered to Earth in great quantities during the heavy bombardment period of solar system history, between 4.5 and 3.8 billion years ago.

The hypothesis that life took place in or around hydrothermal vents (hot springs), where new seafloor is being created along mid-ocean ridges (underwater mountain chains) at the ocean’s bottom is the third theory of life’s origin. By seawater that flows a kilometer or more down through crevices in the rock, is heated, and then rises rapidly back to the surface, the ridges are cooled. During the process, the water gathers substances such as hydrogen, hydrogen sulfide, and dissolved ferrous iron. When it meets the cold water, the extremely hot (350°C) vent water generates a dark plume comprised mostly of iron sulfide, a compound produced by the reaction between ferrous iron and hydrogen sulfide.

Still, the explanation that submarine hydrothermal vents a likely place for life to have originated is controversial. In vent systems, there are various types of materials from which organic molecules can be synthesized. However, complex organic molecules are not stable at the high temperatures observed in vents positioned directly on the axis of a ridge. If life did originate at the mid-ocean ridges, it probably did so in cooler, off-axis vents. Some researchers claim that perfect place for life to have begun would be in some near-freezing surface environment because even the off-axis vents are too warm. The dispute as to whether life originated in a hot or cold environment is unlikely to stop.

## Europe in the High Middle Ages

For 500 years after the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 A.D., a period known as the early Middle Ages, Europe endured an age of political instability, economic decline, and reduced population. But as the millennium approached, the situation began to improve. Toward the end of the tenth century, an increase in the amount of crop-producing land was accompanied by an increase in population, with the potential for that number to rise even higher. The increase in agricultural production came about as a result of a combination of factors, the most prominent of which were changing methods of field management and improvements in agricultural technology.

For much of the early Middle Ages, peasants continued the Roman practice of dividing their fields in two leaving one fallow, or uncultivated, for a year, and planting their crops in the other half. Fallow land restored its nutrients, but the practice meant that half the land produced nothing every year. In southern Europe with its drier climate this system of two-field crop rotation continued, but in northern Europe, peasants improved on this system by dividing their land into three parts. One they left fallow, another they planted in the spring, and the third they planted with winter crops. This three-field crop rotation, dependent on more rainfall than southern Europe received, meant that two-thirds instead of one-half of a peasant's land was under production in one year.

Related to the changes in crop rotation were improvements in plows and animal harnessing. More land under cultivation spurred experimentation in the construction of plows. Peasants attached wheels to their plows, which made it easier for oxen to pull them through the heavier, wetter soil of northern Europe, and made it possible for a plow to move more quickly down a row provided it had a speedy animal pulling it.

Oxen are slow and unintelligent compared to horses, but peasants could not use horses to pull plows until they devised a different kind of harnessing than the strap that circled an ox's neck. With a harness resting on its shoulders instead of its neck, a horse could be used to plow, and horses could walk more quickly and work longer hours than oxen. They also required less guidance, since they understood verbal signals to turn or to stop. Heavier, wheeled plows pulled by suitably harnessed horses meant that peasants could work more land in a day than ever before. Whether an increase in population across western Europe, but particularly in the north, stimulated innovations or whether such innovations contributed to a rise in population, the cumulative effect of these changes in agriculture was apparent in the tenth century. Conditions in Europe were ripe for an economic and cultural upswing.

Even before trade with the eastern Mediterranean increased starting in the twelfth century, trade and towns were on the rise. Travel was still dangerous, but merchants were willing to risk transporting goods over long distances. By the late thirteenth century, a few merchants from Italy had even reached China. Greater surpluses in crops meant people had more to sell at market. More people and goods led to regularly held markets in the most populated location in a region. It would be impossible to say whether trade gave rise to towns or vice versa. What is clear is that each fostered the other in conditions of greater social stability.

Travel on trade routes increased, and some towns sprang up to provide rest and refreshment to traders. The distance between towns often corresponded to the distance that traders could cover in a day. Merchants kept their eyes open for customers with money to spend. The residences of kings, nobles, and powerful officials became sites of markets for local and long-distance traders. In Champagne, in northeastern France, six large annual markets attracted merchants from all over Europe in the twelfth century. Their different currencies prompted the first development of banking techniques. With the use of coins now the norm, money changers daily posted changing exchange rates so that merchants would know the worth of their coins in relation to the worth of other merchants' coins. By 1300, trade had transformed life for the better throughout western Europe.