## The Identification of the Genetic Material

The history of biology is filled with incidents in which research on one specific topic has contributed richly to another, apparently unrelated area. Such a case is the work of Frederick Griffith, an English physician whose attempts to prevent the disease pneumonia led to the identification of the material in cells that contains genetic information the information that determines an organism's characteristic structure. In the 1920s, Griffith was studying the bacterium Streptococcus pneumonia, or pneumococcus, one of the organisms that cause pneumonia in humans. He was trying to develop a vaccine against this devastating illness. He was working with two strains of the bacteria pneumococcus. A bacterial strain is a population of cells descended from a single parent cell; strains differ in one or more inherited characteristics. Griffith's strains were designated S and R because, when grown in the laboratory, one produced shiny, smooth (S) colonies or groups of bacteria, and the other produced colonies that look rough (R).

When the S strain was injected into mice, the mice became diseased. When the R strain was injected, the mice did not become diseased. Bacteria of the S strain are virulent (able to cause disease) because they are surrounded by a protective jelly-like coating that prevents the mouse's immune defense mechanisms from destroying the bacteria before they can multiply. The R strain lacks this coating.

With the hope of developing a vaccine against pneumonia, Griffith injected some mice with heat-killed S pneumococci. These heat-killed bacteria did not produce infection. Griffith assumed the mice would produce antibodies to the bacteria that would allow them to fight the virulent form if they were exposed to it. However, when Griffith inoculated other mice with a mixture of living R bacteria and heat-killed S bacteria, to his astonishment, the mice became ill with pneumonia. When he examined blood from these mice, he found it full of living bacteria many with characteristics of the virulent S strain. Griffith concluded that, in the presence of the dead S pneumococci, some of the living R pneumococci had been transformed into virulent S-strain organisms.

Did this transformation of the bacteria depend on something the mouse did to the bacteria? No. It was shown that simply putting living R and heat-killed S bacteria together in a test tube yielded the same transformation. Next it was discovered that a cell-free extract of heat-killed S cells also transformed R cells. (A cell-free extract contains all the contents of cells, but no intact cells.) This result demonstrated that some substance called at the time a chemical transforming principle from the extract of S pneumococci could cause a heritable change (a change that could be passed on to future generations) in the affected R cells.

From these observations, some scientists concluded that this transforming material carried heritable information, and thus was the genetic material that scientists had been searching for. The identification of the transforming material was a crucial step in the history of biology, accomplished over a period of several years by Oswald Avery and his colleagues at what is now Rockefeller University. They treated samples of the transforming extract in a variety of ways to destroy different types of substances proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and lipids and tested the treated samples to see if they had retained transforming activity. The answer was always the same: If the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) in the extract was destroyed, transforming activity was lost; everything else could be eliminated without removing the transforming ability of the extract. As a final step, Avery, with Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty, isolated virtually pure DNA from a sample of pneumococcal transforming extract and showed that it caused bacterial transformation.

In retrospect, the work of Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty, published in 1944, was a milestone in establishing that DNA is the genetic material. However, at the time, it had little impact on scientists' view about the physical basis of inheritance. The genetic material had to encode all the information needed to specify an organism, and the chemical complexity and diversity of proteins were known to be impressive. So during the first half of the twentieth century, the hereditary material was generally assumed to be a protein. Nucleic acids, by contrast, were known to have only a few components and seemed too simple to carry such complex information.

## Soil Fertilization

Fertilizers partially restore plant nutrients lost by erosion, crop harvesting, and leaching. Farmers can use either organic fertilizer from plant and animal materials or commercial inorganic fertilizer produced from various minerals. Three basic types of organic fertilizer are animal manure, green manure, and compost. Animal manure includes the waste matter of cattle, horses, poultry, and other farm animals. It improves soil structure, adds organic nitrogen, and stimulates beneficial soil bacteria and fungi.

Despite its effectiveness, the use of animal manure in the United States has decreased. There are three reasons for this: the replacement of most mixed animal-raising and crop-farming operations with separate operations for growing crops and raising animals, the high costs of transporting animal manure from feedlots near urban areas to distant rural crop-growing areas, and the replacement of horses and other draft animals that added manure to the soil with tractors and other motorized farm machinery.

Green manure is fresh or growing green vegetation plowed into the soil to increase the organic matter and humus (degraded organic matter) available to the next crop. Compost is a sweet-smelling, dark-brown, humuslike material that is rich in organic matter and soil nutrients. It is produced when microorganisms in soil (mostly fungi and aerobic bacteria) break down organic matter such as leaves, food wastes, paper, and wood in the presence of oxygen. Compost is a rich natural fertilizer and soil conditioner that aerates soil, improves its ability to retain water and nutrients, helps prevent erosion, and prevents nutrients from being wasted by being dumped in landfills. Compost is produced by piling up alternating layers of nitrogen-rich wastes (such as grass clippings, weeds, animal manure, and vegetable kitchen scraps), carbon-rich plant wastes (dead leaves, hay, straw, sawdust), and topsoil. Compost provides a home for microorganisms that help decompose plant and manure layers and reduces the amount of plant wastes taken to landfills and incinerators.

Another form of organic fertilizer is the spores of mushrooms, puffballs, and truffles. Rapidly growing and spreading mycorrhizae fungi in the spores attach to plant roots and help them take in moisture and nutrients from the soil. Unlike typical fertilizers that must be applied every few weeks, one application of mushroom fungi lasts all year and costs just pennies per plant. The fungi also produce a bigger root system, which makes plants more disease resistant.

Corn, tobacco, and cotton can deplete the topsoil of nutrients, especially nitrogen, if planted on the same land several years in a row. One way to reduce such losses is crop rotation. Farmers plant areas or strips with nutrient-depleting crops one year. In the next year they plant the same areas with legumes, whose root nodules add nitrogen to the soil. In addition to helping restore soil nutrients, this method reduces erosion by keeping the soil covered with vegetation and helps reduce crop losses to insects by presenting them with a changing target.

Today, many farmers rely on commercial inorganic fertilizers containing nitrogen (as ammonium ions, nitrate ions, or urea), phosphorus (as phosphate ions), and potassium (as potassium ions). Inorganic commercial fertilizers are easily transported, stored, and applied. Worldwide, their use increased about tenfold between 1950 and 1989 but declined by 12% between 1990 and 1999. Today, the additional food they help produce feeds one of every three people in the world, without them, world food output, would drop an estimated 40%.

Commercial inorganic fertilizers have some disadvantages, however. These include (1) not adding humus to the soil, (2) reducing the soil’s content of organic matter and thus its ability to hold water (unless animal manure and green manure are also added to the soil),(3) lowering the oxygen content of soil and keeping fertilizer from being taken up as efficiently, (4) typically supplying only two or three of the twenty or so nutrients needed by plants, and (5) releasing nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas that can enhance global warming. The widespread use of commercial inorganic fertilizers, especially on sloped land near streams and lakes, also causes water pollution as nitrate and phosphate fertilizer nutrients are washed into nearby bodies of water. The resulting plant nutrient enrichment causes algae blooms that use up oxygen dissolved in the water, thereby killing fish.