## Foundational and Keystone Species

The harmony present in any ecological system relies on the inclusion of different types of species, each with a specific role or set of roles. Although to some extent all species contribute in important ways, scientists are now learning about the pivotal parts played by, what are being called foundational and keystone species. Interestingly, the latter represent only a small fraction of the overall animal population within an ecosystem while the former can make up a significant portion of it. In both cases, though, their removal often results in massive changes to, if not the complete destruction of, their ecosystems. Efforts to conserve these species are currently based on the new idea that they prevent the start of a domino effect that would, once started, be unstoppable.

Foundational species are the backbones of the systems they inhabit. These species are referred to as primary producers, which means that they generate a large amount of the abundance other species require to survive. In most cases, they are a type of vegetation or stationary animal. Coral, which tends to grow in large colonies, is often pointed to as an example. Eventually a group of colonies will form a coral reef, which can sustain a complete ecosystem around it. The reef contains the skeletal remains of coral at its bottom and living coral on the top. Numerous animals, including zooplankton and sponges, live in the small crevices located in the rock-like bottom. At the top, the coral interacts with seaweed and other forms of vegetation to regulate the levels of nutrients and gases in the water. There are also more than four thousand types of fish that live on or around most coral reefs. Fish rely on the holes in the reef for protection. The more colorful species of coral provide excellent camouflage for fish, as well. Obviously, without its foundational species, an ecosystem would collapse.

Keystone species play less apparent but equally important roles. The name comes from the keystones used in the building of stone archways. The keystone receives the smallest amount of pressure of all the stones in the arch, but, if it is removed, the arch will collapse. In the same way, research is now showing, certain species within ecosystems, although they are smaller in numbers and biomass than most of the other species present, act like keystones. These species are being categorized as either predators or engineers, depending on their relationships with the various species around them. These categories are not absolute, though, and animals are moved from one to the other as new facts come to light.

In the case of predator keystone species, there are four carnivores that prey on herbivores and other animals. Also, the herbivores usually have no other natural predator in the ecosystem. The sea otter is now considered by many scientists to be a keystone species, because it controls the number of sea urchins, which have few other predators. Both species can be found around kelp forests, which are in the warm parts of the world's oceans. Because kelp is an underwater plant, its roots are not used for the collection of nutrients. Instead, they are there to anchor the plant. As soon as enough sea urchins chewed on the roots, which are fragile, the kelp would be removed from the ecosystem. If the sea otter were to disappear, the urchins would quickly grow in number and destroy all the kelp.

Engineer keystone species maintain the balance in ecosystems in different ways. Although bears tend to live in forests, they bring in important sources of nutrients from ocean and sea-based ecosystems.The bears capture large salmon from the water and take them into the forest to eat them. This distributes large amounts of protein in the form of bear waste matter as well as uneaten portions of salmon. The protein eventually supports life in the forest, either as a food source for smaller animals or the vegetation. Another species that plays a part similar to that of bears is the beaver. Through the construction of dams, beavers convert small rivers into ponds and marshes. The new landscape in turn supports a variety of fish, which in turn provides a dependable source of food for the beavers. The removal of beavers from an ecosystem would also remove the landscape it depends on.

## The Rise of Moscow

The rise of Moscow during medieval times was a fundamental development inRussian history. Moscow began with very little and for a long time could not becompared to such flourishing principalities as Novgorod or Galicia. Even in itsown area, the northeast, it was junior to old centers like Rostov and Suzdal. Inaccounting for Moscow's rise, historians have emphasized several factors orrather groups of factors.

First, attention may be given to the doctrine of geographic causation. It stresses the decisive importance of the location on Moscow for the later expansion of the Muscovite state (the medieval state centered in Moscow) and includes several lines of argument. Moscow lay as a crossing of three roads. The most important was the way from the historically crucial city of Kiev and the declining south to the growing northeast. In fact Moscow has been described as the first stopping and setting point in the northeast. But it also profited from moments in other directions, including the reverse. Thus it seems immigrants came to Moscow after the Mongol devastation of the lands further to the northeast. Moscow was also situated on a bend of the Moscow River that flows from the northwest to the southeast into the Oka, the largest western tributary of the Volga River. To speak more broadly of water communications which span and unite European Russia, Moscow has the rare fortune of being located near the headwaters of four major rivers: the Oka, the Volga, the Don, and the Dnieper. This offered marvelous opportunities for expansion across the flowing plain, especially as there were no mountains or other natural obstacles to hem in the young principality.

In another sense too, Moscow benefited from a central position. It stood in the midst of lands inhabited by the Russian people which, so the argument runs, provided a proper setting for a natural growth in all directions. In fact some specialists have tried to estimate precisely how close to the geographic center of the Russian people Moscow was situated, noting also such circumstances as proximity to the land dividing the two main dialects of the Great Russian language. Central location within Russia, to make an additional point, cushioned Moscow from outside invaders. Thus, for example, it was the city of Novgorod, not Moscow, that continuously had to meet enemies from the northwest, while in the southeast Riazan absorbed the first blows from the direction. All in all, the considerable significance of the location on Moscow cannot be denied although this geographic factor has generally been assigned less relative weight by recent scholars.

The economic argument is linked in part to the geographic.The Moscow Riverserved as an important trade artery, and as the Muscovite principality expanded around its waterways, it profited by and in turn helped to promote increasing economic intercourse. One school of thought has treated the expansion of Moscow largely in terms of the growth of a common market. Another economic approach emphasizes the success of the Muscovite princes in developing agriculture in their domains and supporting colonization. These princes clearly outdistance their rivals in obtaining peasants to settle on their lands. As a further advantage, they managed to maintain in their realm a relative peace and security highly beneficial to economic life.

The last view introduces another key factor in explaining the Muscovite rise: the role of the rulers of Moscow. Moscow has generally been considered fortunate in its princes. Sheer luck constituted an important part of the picture. For several generations, the princes of Moscow had the advantage of male succession without interruption or conflict. In particular, for a long time the sons of the princes of Moscow were lucky not to have uncles competing for the Muscovite seat. When the classic power struggle between royal uncles and nephews finally erupted under Basil II(reigned 1425-1462), direct succession from father to son possessed sufficient standing and support in the principality of Moscow to overcome the challenge. The principality has also been considered fortunate because its early rulers, descending from the youngest son of Alexander Nevskii (1220?-1263) and thus representing a junior princely branch, found it expedient to devote themselves to their small holdings instead of neglecting them for more ambitious undertakings elsewhere.