## The Sentinel Behavior of Meerkats

A species of small mongooses in Africa called meerkats share sentinel (guard) duties to warn other group members by repeating alarm calls if a predator is seen. This is an important job, because when meerkats are foraging, their heads are in the ground seeking prey, and they cannot see a predator coming.

The question is, why do group members take turns acting as sentinels? Kin selection, that is, being able to save the lives of family members can be one hypothesis for this type of sentinel behavior. Family members share copies of a meerkat's genes. Kin selection is achieved by helping a meerkat’s own offspring as well as non descendant kin, including sibling, nieces, nephews, aunts, and uncles.

Therefore, if members of a certain group are closely related, a sentinel ensures that copies of its genes can be passed on to future generations by saving the majority of family members by alerting others, even at the expense of its own life.

Assuming this hypothesis is true, we can predict that group members have close genetic ties. Otherwise, kin selection would not work. But this prediction does hold true. A dominant, breeding female is mother to 75 percent of all the litters in a group, and one dominant male fathers 75 percent of all the pups born. Even though a typical meerkat group includes a few immigrants, most subordinate adults are siblings or half siblings. Therefore, it is likely that subordinate adults share 25 or 50 percent of their genes.

On account of most meerkat group members being family, it is possible that kin selection has favored sentinel behavior. Nonetheless, by itself, a close inherent relationship is not enough evidence to conclude that kin selection has played a role. Thus, we need further evidence, and must improve the prediction.

Based on the same hypothesis, a more specific prediction is that each mongoose should increase the frequency of sentinel behavior when they are guarding family members. This new prediction needed testing, so the group was observed to determine which members stand guard and when. The immigrants without any kin relations to other group members acted as sentinels just as much as the individuals with many relatives nearby. Therefore, the result of this test does not support the kin-selection hypothesis.

Another hypothesis that is often suggested to explain such cooperative behavior is that it results from reciprocal altruism~each individual takes turns standing guard to benefit the rest of the group, rather than itself. The reciprocal altruism theory can work only when those who cheat by avoiding guard duty can be identified and punished by the rest of the group. This hypothesis produces the prediction that there should be a regular rotation of sentry duty within the group and that the ones who neglect this duty should be chastised. However, this is not observed. In fact, the group members do take turns on sentry duty, but there is no predetermined order for this. In addition, when some members shorten their shift, other group members increase their contributions to compensate. The predictions and observations of the reciprocal-altruism hypothesis do not coincide with each other.

Yet another hypothesis for the evolution of meerkat sentinel behavior is that it results from selfish antipredator behavior. This idea stems from the fact that the meerkat watching for predators increases its personal safety, and warning others does not harbor any disadvantage. So, when a meerkat has had enough to eat, it should watch for predators. The sentinel on duty can then return to foraging. This hypothesis produces a prediction that sentinel duty is not dangerous or risky in any way. This does seem to be true. Over the course of 2,000 hours of observation, no sentinels were attacked or killed by predators. They may actually be safer because they are the first to sense the predator. Moreover, they generally stand guard within 5 meters of a burrow, and are the first underground when a predator comes close.If a meerkat’s personal safety is increased with serving as a sentinel, it would be possible to predict that an individual would spend a proportion of its time guarding, whether it was solitary or part of a group. As predicted, individual meerkats spend about the same time on guard duty as members of large groups. Groups with more members suffer less predation because there is a sentinel for a longer portion of foraging time than in small groups.

## Earth’s Atmosphere

Earth’s atmosphere has changed through time. Compared to the Sun, whose composition is representative of the raw materials from which Earth and other planets in our solar system formed, Earth contains less of some volatile elements, such as nitrogen, argon, hydrogen, and helium. These elements were lost when the envelope of gases, or primary atmosphere, that surrounded early Earth, was stripped away by the solar wind or by meteorite impacts, or both. Little by little, the planet generated a new, secondary atmosphere by volcanic outgassing of volatile materials from its interior.

Volcanic outgassing continues to be the main process by which volatile materials are released from Earth—although it is now going on at a much slower rate. The main chemical constituent of volcanic gases (as much as 97 percent of volume) is water vapor, with varying amounts of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and other gases. In fact, the total volume of volcanic gases released over the past 4 billion years or so is believed to account for the present composition of the atmosphere with one important exception: oxygen. Earth had virtually no oxygen in its atmosphere more than 4 billion years ago, but the atmosphere is now approximately 21 percent oxygen.

Traces of oxygen were probably generated in the early atmosphere by the breakdown of water molecules into oxygen and hydrogen by ultraviolet light (a process called photodissociation). Although this is an important process, it cannot begin to account for the present high levels of oxygen in the atmosphere. Almost all of the free oxygen now in the atmosphere originated through photosynthesis, the process whereby plants use light energy to induce carbon dioxide to react with water, producing carbohydrates and oxygen.

Oxygen is a very reactive chemical, so at first most of the free oxygen produced by photosynthesis was combined with iron in ocean water to form iron oxide-bearing minerals. The evidence of the gradual transition from oxygen-poor to oxygen-rich water is preserved in seafloor sediments. The minerals in seafloor sedimentary rocks that are more than about 2.5 billion years old contain reduced (oxygen-poor) iron compounds. In rocks that are less than 1.8 billion years old, oxidized (oxygen-rich) compounds predominate. The sediments that were precipitated during the transition contain alternating bands of red (oxidized iron) and black (reduced iron) minerals. These rocks are called banded-iron formations. Because ocean water is in constant contact with the atmosphere, and the two systems function together in a state of dynamic equilibrium, the transition from an oxygen-poor to an oxygen-rich atmosphere also must have occurred during this period.

Along with the buildup of molecular oxygen (O2) came an eventual increase in ozone (O3) levels in the atmosphere.Because ozone filters out harmful ultraviolet radiation, this made it possible for life to flourish in shallow water and finally on land. This critical state in the evolution of the atmosphere was replaced between 1100 and 542 million years ago. Interestingly, the fossil record shows an explosion of life forms 542 million years ago.

Oxygen has continued to play a key role in the evolution and form of life. Over the last 200 million years, the concentration of oxygen has risen from 10 percent to as much as 25 percent of the atmosphere, before setting (probably not permanently) at its current value of 21 percent. This increase has benefited mammals, which are voracious oxygen consumers. Not only do we require oxygen to fuel our high-energy, warm-blooded metabolism, our unique reproductive system demands even more. An expectant mother’s used (venous) blood must still have enough oxygen in it to diffuse through the placenta into her unborn child’s bloodstream. It would be very difficult for any mammal species to survive in an atmosphere of only 10 percent oxygen.

Geologists cannot yet be certain why the atmospheric oxygen levels increased, but they have a hypothesis. First, photosynthesis is only one part of the oxygen cycle. The cycle is completed by decomposition, in which organic carbon combines with oxygen and forms carbon dioxide. But if organic matter is buried as sediment before it fully decomposes, its carbon is no longer available to react with the free oxygen. Thus there will be a net accumulation of carbon in sediments and of oxygen in the atmosphere.